Chap. 124

purposes and shall be exempt from taxation, betterments and special assessments. The town
of Framingham may however, in lieu of such taxes or betterment, that a sum be paid to said
town in any year; a sum determined to be not in excess of the taxes which would have been
paid based upon then calculated assessments.
        Nothing in this act shall be construed to prevent the taxation of real estate so acquired
by the corporation and leased by it.
        SECTION 11. The corporation shall carry out programs in a manner that is in
conformance with the town of Framingham building codes and zoning by-laws. .
        SECTION 12. Insofar as the provisions of this act are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other law, general or special, excluding Framingham building and zoning
codes, the provisions of this act shall be controlling.
        SECTION 13. This act being necessary for the continued welfare of the town of
Framingham and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to affect the purpose thereof.
                                                                 Approved September 1, 1995.


Chapter 125. AN ACT FURTHER REGULATING CONSUMER REPORTING
             AGENCIES

        Whereas, The deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purpose, which
is to immediately regulate consumer reporting agencies, therefore it is hereby declared to be
an emergency law, necessary for the immediate preservation of the public convenience.

        Be it enacted, etc., as follows:

         SECTION 1. Section 50 of chapter 93 of the General Laws, as appearing in the
 1994 Official Edition, is hereby amended by inserting before the definition of "Investigative
consumer report" the following definition:-
         "Firm offer of credit", any offer of credit to a consumer that will be honored if based
on information in a consumer report on the consumer and other information relative to the
creditworthiness of the consumer, the consumer is determined to meet the criteria used to
select the consumer for said offer.
         SECTION 2. Said section 50 of said chapter 93, as so appearing, is hereby further
amended by inserting after the definition of "Person" the following definition:-
         "Prescreening", a process whereby a consumer reporting agency compiles or edits
for a client a list of consumers who meet specific criteria and provides such list to the client
or third party on behalf of the client for the purpose of making a firm offer of credit.
         SECTION 3. Said chapter 93 is hereby further amended by striking out section 51,
as so appearing, and inserting in place thereof the following two sections:-
         Section 51. (a) A consumer reporting agency may furnish a consumer report under
the following circumstances and no other:
         (1) in response to the order of a court having jurisdiction to issue such an order; or


                                                                                            769
Chap. 125

        (2) in accordance with the written instructions of the consumer to whom it relates;
or
         (3) to a person which it reasonably believes:
         (i) intends to use the information in connection with a credit transaction involving
the consumer on whom the information is to be furnished and involving the extension of
credit to, or review or collection of an account of, the consumer; or
         (ii) intends to use the information for employment purposes; or
         (iii) intends to use the information in connection with the underwriting of insurance
involving the consumer; or
         (iv) intends to use the information in connection with a determination of the
consumer's eligibility, or continuing eligibility, for a license or other benefit granted by a
governmental instrumentality required by law to consider an applicant's financial
responsibility or status; or
         (v) intends to use the information in connection with a transaction either entered into
or being negotiated with a consumer, if by the terms of the transaction either party transfers
an interest in real or personal property, pays money or renders services, or becomes
obligated so to transfer property, pay money or render services; provided, however, that the
consumer who is the subject of the report, except in the case of the rental or lease of
residential property, has provided permission in writing or in the same manner in which the
transaction was negotiated or entered into, that a consumer report may be requested in
connection with the transaction; or
         (vi) intends to use the information for the enforcement of child support orders under
chapter one hundred and nineteen A; or
         (b) A consumer reporting agency may furnish information for the purposes of a
credit transaction under subclause (i) of clause (3) of paragraph (a) where the credit
transaction is not initiated by the consumer, only if:
         (1) the consumer authorizes the consumer reporting agency to furnish the consumer
credit report to the person; or
         (2) the proposed transaction involves a firm offer of credit to the consumer, the
consumer reporting agency has complied with the provisions of section fifty-one A, and the
consumer has not elected to have his name excluded from any list of names provided by the
consumer reporting agency for purposes of reporting in connection with the potential
issuance of firm offers of credit and the agency only provides the name and address of the
consumer and information pertaining to a consumer which is not identified or identifiable
with particular accounts or transactions of the consumer.
         Section 51 A. (a) A consumer may elect to have his name and address excluded from
any list provided by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to clause (2) of paragraph (b) of
section fifty-one by notifying the consumer reporting agency, by telephone or in writing,
through the notification system maintained by the consumer reporting agency pursuant to
paragraph (c), that the consumer does not consent to any use of consumer reports relating
to the consumer in connection with any transaction that is not initiated by the consumer.
         (b) An election by a consumer under this section shall be effective with respect to

770
Chap. 125

a consumer reporting agency, and any affiliate of the consumer reporting agency, on the date
on which the consumer notifies the consumer reporting agency.
         (c) Each consumer reporting agency that provides prescreening lists under clause (2)
of paragraph (b) of section fifty-one in connection with a credit transaction not initiated by
the consumer shall establish and maintain a notification system, including a toll-free
telephone number, which permits any consumer, with appropriate identification and for
whom the consumer reporting agency has a file, to notify the consumer reporting agency of
the consumer's election to have the consumer's name removed from any list of names and
addresses provided by the consumer reporting agency. Each consumer reporting agency
which compiles and maintains files on consumers on a nationwide basis shall establish and
maintain a notification system jointly with its affiliated consumer reporting agencies.
         (d) Any person who uses a consumer report in connection with any credit transaction
not initiated by the consumer and which consists of a firm offer of credit shall provide with
any solicitation made to the consumer a clear and conspicuous statement that the consumer
has a right to prohibit the use of information contained in the consumer's file with any
consumer reporting agency in connection with any credit transaction that is not initiated by
the consumer. Said statement shall inform the consumer that he may exercise this right by
notifying the consumer reporting agency by employing the notification system or joint
notification system established under paragraph (c). A consumer may cancel or review his
decision to have his name removed from prescreening lists provided under clause (2) of
paragraph (b) of section fifty-one by notifying the consumer reporting agency through the
notification system established under said paragraph (c). Nothing in this paragraph shall
preclude a person who uses a consumer report in connection with credit transactions not
initiated by the consumer from establishing a notification system, pursuant to paragraph (c)
and provide such toll-free telephone number on any solicitation pursuant to this paragraph,
which allows the person to notify each applicable consumer reporting agency on the
consumer's behalf after receiving notice from the consumer of his election to have his name
removed from such prescreening list or of the consumer's decision to review or cancel such
a removal.
        SECTION 4. Said chapter 93 is hereby further amended by striking out section 53,
as so appearing, and inserting in place thereof the following section:-
        Section 53. (a) A person may not procure or cause to be prepared an investigative
consumer report on any consumer unless:
        (1) it is clearly and accurately disclosed in writing to the consumer, prior to
requesting the consumer reporting agency to prepare the report, that an investigative
consumer report commonly includes information as to the consumer's character, general
reputation, personal characteristics, and mode of living, and the disclosure includes the
precise nature and scope of the investigation requested and the right to have a copy of the
report upon request; and
        (2) the consumer provides the person requesting the report written permission to
obtain the investigative consumer report prior to the person making such request to the
consumer reporting agency.


                                                                                         771
Chap. 125

          (b) The consumer reporting agency shall upon the request of the consumer provide
to the consumer a copy of such report upon its completion.
          (c) No person may be held liable for any violation of paragraph (a) if he proves by
a preponderance of the evidence that at the time of the violation he maintained reasonable
procedures to assure compliance with said paragraph (a).
          SECTION 5. Said chapter 93 is hereby further amended by inserting after
section 54, as so appearing, the following section:-
          Section 54A. (a) Every person who furnishes information to a consumer reporting
agency shall follow reasonable procedures to ensure that the information reported to a
consumer reporting agency is accurate and complete. No person may provide information
to a consumer reporting agency if such person knows or has reasonable cause to believe such
information is not accurate or complete.
          (b) A person who (1) in the ordinary course of business regularly and on a routine
basis furnishes information to one or more consumer reporting agencies about the person's
own transactions or experiences with one or more consumers, and (2) determines that
information on a specific transaction or experience so provided to a consumer reporting
agency is not complete or accurate, shall promptly notify the consumer reporting agency of
such determination and provide to the consumer reporting agency any corrections to that
information, or any additional information, which is necessary to make the information
provided by the person to the consumer reporting agency complete and accurate.
          (c) While the completeness or accuracy of any information on a specific transaction
or experience furnished by any person.to a consumer reporting agency is subject to a
continuing bona fide dispute between the affected consumer and that person, the person may
not furnish the information to any consumer reporting agency without also including a notice
that the information is disputed by the consumer; provided further, that no person may report
to a consumer reporting agency that a consumer's account is delinquent until said bona fide
dispute is resolved pursuant to the federal Fair Credit Billing Act.
          (d) A person who regularly furnishes information to a consumer reporting agency
regarding a consumer who has an open-end credit account with such person, and which
account is closed by the consumer, shall notify the consumer reporting agency of the closure
of such account by the consumer, in information regularly furnished for the period in which
the account is closed.
          (e) A person who places a delinquent account for collection, internally or by referral
to a third party, charges the delinquent account to profit or loss, or takes similar action, and
 subsequently furnishes information to a consumer reporting agency regarding such action,
 shall include within the information furnished, the approximate commencement date of the
 delinquency which gave rise to such action, unless such date was previously reported to the
 consumer reporting agency. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be deemed to require
that a delinquency must be reported to a consumer reporting agency.
          (f) Upon receiving notice of a dispute notice pursuant to paragraph (a) of section
 fifty-eight with regard to the completeness or accuracy of any information provided to a
 consumer reporting agency, the person that provided the information shall (1) complete an


772
Chap. 125

investigation with respect to the disputed information and report to the consumer reporting
agency the results of that investigation before the end of the thirty-business-day period
beginning on the date the consumer reporting agency receives the notice of dispute from the
consumer in accordance with paragraph (a) of section fifty-eight and (2) review relevant
information submitted to it.
         (g) A person who furnishes information to a consumer reporting agency shall be
liable for failure to comply with the provisions of this section, unless the person so
furnishing the information establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that, at the time
of the failure to comply with this section, such person maintained reasonable procedures to
comply with such provisions.
         SECTION 6. Said chapter 93 is hereby further amended by striking out section 56,
as so appearing, and inserting in place thereof the following section:-
         Section 56. (a) Every consumer reporting agency shall, upon request and proper
identification of any consumer, clearly and accurately disclose to the consumer:
         (1) the nature, contents and substance of all information, except medical information,
in itsfileon the consumer at the time of the request, and which is obtainable based upon the
identifying information supplied by the consumer when making such request, and if such
consumer has made a written request, deliver a written copy or photocopy of all such
information except any code identifications which are used solely for purposes of
transferring such information to and from consumer reporting agencies; provided, however,
that the names of the users corresponding to the code identifications shall be disclosed to the
consumer; provided, further, that the agency shall provide a clear, simple and plain meaning
explanation of the information provided under this paragraph and such explanation shall be
in a readable format and type, which shall in no case be smaller than ten point type;
         (2) the sources of all credit information obtained through routine credit reporting or
through any other credit reporting techniques in the file at the time of the request, except that
the sources of information acquired solely for use in preparing an investigative consumer
report and actually used for no other purpose need not be disclosed; provided, however, that
in the event an action is brought pursuant to section sixty-five, such sources shall be
available to the plaintiff under appropriate discovery procedures in the court in which the
action is brought; and
         (3) the recipients of any consumer report on the consumer which it has furnished for
employment purposes within the two year period preceding the request, and for any other
purpose within the six-month period preceding the request.
         (b) Every consumer reporting agency, upon contact by a consumer by phone, mail,
or in person regarding information which may be contained in the agency files regarding that
consumer, shall with each written disclosure, or in response to a request by the consumer to
be advised as to his rights, promptly advise the consumer of the consumer's rights under this
section. The written notice shall be in a clear and conspicuous format and be no smaller than
ten point type. The notice shall inform the consumer of the consumer's rights under this
chapter, provided in a clear and conspicuous manner, in substantially the following manner:
         "You have arightto obtain a copy of your credit file from a consumer credit report-


                                                                                            773
Chap. 125

ing agency. You may be charged a reasonable fee not exceeding eight dollars. There is no
fee, however, if you have been turned down for credit, employment, insurance, or rental
dwelling because of information in your credit report within the preceding sixty days. The
consumer credit reporting agency must provide someone to help you interpret the
information in your credit file. Each calendar year you are entitled to receive, upon request,
one free consumer credit report.
          You have a right to dispute inaccurate information by contacting the consumer credit
reporting agency directly. However, neither you nor any credit repair company or credit
service organization has the right to have accurate, current, and verifiable information
removed from your credit report. In most cases, under state and federal law, the consumer
credit reporting agency must remove accurate, negative information from your report only
if it is over seven years old, and must remove bankruptcy information only if it is over ten
years old.
          If you have notified a consumer credit reporting agency in writing that you dispute
the accuracy of information in your file, the consumer credit reporting agency must then,
within thirty business days, reinvestigate and modify or remove inaccurate information. The
consumer credit reporting agency may not charge a fee for this service. Any pertinent
information and copies of all documents you have concerning a dispute should be given to
the consumer credit reporting agency.
          If reinvestigation does not resolve the dispute to your satisfaction, you may send a
statement to the consumer credit reporting agency to keep in your file, explaining why you
think the record is inaccurate. The consumer credit reporting agency must include your
statement about the disputed information in a report it issues about you.
          You have a right to receive a record of all inquires relating to a credit transaction
initiated in the six months preceding your request, or two years in the case of a credit report
used for employment purposes. This record shall include the recipients of any consumer
credit report.
          You have the right to opt out of any prescreening lists compiled by or with the
assistance of a consumer credit reporting agency by calling the agency's toll-free telephone
number or contacting the agency in writing. You may be entitled to collect compensation,
in certain circumstances, if you are damaged by a person's negligent or intentional failure
to comply with the provisions of the credit reporting act".
          SECTION 7. Section 57 of said chapter 93, as so appearing, is hereby amended by
inserting after the word "provide", in line 13, the following words:- a toll-free telephone
number and.
          SECTION 8. Said chapter 93 is hereby further amended by striking out sections 58
and 59, as so appearing, and inserting in place thereof the following two sections:-
          Section 58. (a) If the completeness or accuracy of any item of information in his file
is disputed by a consumer, and such dispute is directly conveyed to the consumer reporting
agency by the consumer, the consumer reporting agency shall within a reasonable period of
time, but not to exceed thirty business days beginning on the date the consumer reporting
agency receives notice from the consumer, reinvestigate and record the current status of such


774
Chap. 125

information unless it has reasonable grounds to believe that the dispute is frivolous or
irrelevant; including by reason of a failure of the consumer to provide sufficient information,
as requested by the consumer reporting agency, to resolve the dispute. Unless the consumer
reporting agency determines that the dispute is frivolous or irrelevant before the end of the
five business day period beginning on the date the consumer reporting agency receives
notice of the dispute under this section, the agency shall notify any person who provided the
information in dispute at the address provided by the person. A consumer reporting agency
may require that disputes by consumers be in writing.
          (b) If the consumer reporting agency determines that the dispute is frivolous or
irrelevant, it shall notify the consumer by mail or, if authorized by the consumer for that
purpose, by any other means available to the consumer reporting agency, within five
business days after the determination is made that it is terminating its reinvestigation of the
item of information. In this notification the consumer reporting agency shall state the
specific reasons why it has determined that the consumer's dispute is frivolous or irrelevant.
The presence of contradictory information in the consumer's file shall not in and of itself
constitute grounds for believing the dispute to be frivolous or irrelevant.
          (c) If after such reinvestigation such information is found to be inaccurate or can no
longer be verified, the consumer reporting agency shall within three business days delete
such information.
          (d) If the reinvestigation does not resolve the dispute, the consumer may file a
statement setting forth the nature of the dispute.
         (e) Within ten business days after completion of a reinvestigation, the agency shall
provide the consumer with written information, free of charge, that includes: (1) a statement
that the reinvestigation is completed, (2) a consumer report that is based on the consumer's
file as that file is revised as a result of the reinvestigation, (3) a description or indication of
any changes made in the consumer report as a result of such revisions, (4) notice that, if
requested by the consumer, a description of the procedure used to determine the accuracy
and completeness of the information shall be provided to the consumer by the consumer
reporting agency, including the business name, address, and telephone number of any
furnisher of information contacted in connection with such information, (5) notice that the
consumer has the right to add a statement to the consumer's file disputing the accuracy or
completeness of the information, (6) notice that the consumer has the right to request that
the consumer reporting agency furnish notifications under paragraphs (g) and (i), and
(7) notice that the consumer has a right to obtain all information required to be disclosed
under section fifty-six.
         (f) Whenever a statement of dispute is filed, the consumer reporting agency shall,
in any subsequent consumer report containing the information in question, clearly note that
it is disputed by the consumer and provide the consumer's statement as part of its report.
         (g) Following any deletion of information which is found not to be accurate, or
whose accuracy can no longer be verified, the consumer reporting agency shall, upon the
request of the consumer, within fifteen business days, furnish notification to any person who
has within two years prior thereto received a consumer report for employment purposes, or


                                                                                              775
Chap. 125

within six months prior thereto received a consumer report for any other purpose, which
contained the deleted item, that the item has been deleted.
         (h) A consumer reporting agency shall accept the consumer's version of the disputed
information and correct or delete the disputed item when the consumer submits to the
consumer reporting agency documentation obtained from the source of the item in dispute
or from public records confirming that the report was inaccurate or incomplete, unless the
consumer reporting agency in good faith has substantial reason to doubt the authenticity of
the documentation, or the completeness of the information provided.
         (i) No information may be reinserted in a consumer's file after having been deleted
pursuant to this section unless the person who furnishes the information to be reinserted
verifies that the information is accurate. If any information so deleted from a consumer's file
is reinserted in the file, the consumer reporting agency shall promptly notify the consumer
of the reinsertion in writing or, if authorized by the consumer for that purpose, by any other
means available to the consumer reporting agency. As part of, or in addition to, said notice
the consumer reporting agency shall, within five business days of reinserting the
information, provide, in writing to the consumer: (1) a statement that the disputed
information has been reinserted; (2) a notice that the agency will provide to the consumer,
within fifteen days following a request, the name, address, and telephone number of any
furnisher of information contacted or which contacted the consumer reporting agency in
connection with the reinsertion; (3) the toll-free telephone number of the consumer reporting
agency that the consumer may use to obtain such name, address, and telephone number; and,
(4) a notice that the consumer has the right to add a statement to his file disputing the
accuracy or completeness of the information.
          Section 59. (a) A consumer reporting agency shall make all disclosures pursuant to
section fifty-six without charge to the consumer if, within sixty days after receipt by such
consumer of a notification pursuant to section sixty-two or notification from a debt collection
agency affiliated with such consumer reporting agency stating that the consumer's credit
rating may be or has been adversely affected, the consumer makes a request under section
fifty-six.
          (b) Except as provided in paragraph (c), a consumer reporting agency shall not
charge a consumer for any disclosures or a copy of a consumer report requested pursuant to
section fifty-eight.
          (c) Except as otherwise provided, the consumer reporting agency may impose a
reasonable charge, not to exceed eight dollars: (1) for making disclosures to a consumer
pursuant to section fifty-six, the charge for which shall be indicated to the consumer prior
to making disclosure; and (2) for furnishing notifications, statements, or summaries, to a
person pursuant to paragraph (g) of section fifty-eight, the charge for which shall be
indicated to the consumer prior to furnishing such information.
          (d) Each consumer reporting agency which compiles and maintains files on
consumers on a nationwide basis shall furnish without charge to any consumer who has
provided verification of his identity and who meets other requirements as set forth in section
fifty-seven and who requests a copy of his consumer report, one complete consumer report


776
Chap. 125

per calendar year.
        (e) Each consumer reporting agency which does not compile and maintain files on
consumers on a nationwide basis shall furnish, for a charge not to exceed five dollars, to any
consumer who has provided verification of his identity and who meets other requirements
as set forth in section fifty-seven and who requests a copy of his consumer report, one
complete consumer report per calendar year.
        SECTION 9. Section 60 of said chapter 93, as so appearing, is hereby amended by
adding the following paragraph:-
        A consumer reporting agency which furnishes a consumer report for employment
purposes shall enter into an agreement with the user of such consumer report which provides
that no consumer report may be requested by the user until and unless the user has provided
written notice to the employee or prospective employee that a consumer report regarding the
employee will be requested. For current employees, notification in an employee manual
shall be sufficient for the purposes of this section.
         SECTION 10. Said chapter 93 is hereby further amended by inserting after
section 60, as so appearing, the following section:-
         Section 60A. A consumer reporting agency which compiles and reports items of
information on consumers which are matters of public record, for the purpose of furnishing
a consumer report, shall:
        (a) Maintain reasonable procedures designed to insure that whenever public record
information is reported, in a consumer report, it is complete and up to date to the extent
practicable. It shall be deemed a reasonable procedure for a consumer reporting agency to
accurately report the status of public record information as of the date recorded in its files
provided that such information is updated on a regular basis.
        (b) When conducting a reinvestigation as required by paragraph (a) of section
fifty-eight, a consumer reporting agency shall promptly record and report the current status
of the public record.
Nothing contained in this section shall permit the use of public record information otherwise
prohibited under section fifty-two.
        SECTION 11. Section 62 of said chapter 93, as so appearing, is hereby amended
by striking out subsection (a) and inserting in place thereof the following subsection:-
        (a) Whenever credit or insurance for personal, family or household purposes, or
employment involving a consumer is denied or terminated or the charge for such credit or
insurance is increased either wholly or partly or whenever a consumer's line of credit is
reduced, except when the consumer is delinquent with regard to such line of credit, because
of information contained in a consumer report from a consumer reporting agency, the user
of the consumer report shall, within ten business days of its decision to deny or terminate
such credit, insurance or employment, or to increase the charge for such credit or insurance,
or to reduce a consumer's line of credit, except when the consumer is delinquent with regard
to such line of credit, notify such consumer in writing against whom such adverse action has
been taken. Said notice shall be in a clear and conspicuous format, no smaller than ten point
type, and shall contain the name, address, and toll-free telephone number of any consumer


                                                                                         777
Chap. 125

reporting agency which provided any consumer report which was reviewed or otherwise
taken into account in the making of such adverse action and shall inform the consumer of
his rights in substantially the following manner:
         "You have the right to obtain a free copy of your credit report within sixty days from
the consumer credit reporting agency which has been identified on this notice. The
consumer credit reporting agency must provide someone to help you interpret the
information on your credit report. Each calendar year you are entitled to receive, upon
request, one free consumer report.
         You have the right to dispute inaccurate information by contacting the consumer
credit reporting agency directly. If you have notified a consumer credit reporting agency in
writing that you dispute the accuracy of information in your file, the agency must then,
within thirty business days, reinvestigate and modify or remove inaccurate information. The
consumer credit reporting agency may not charge a fee for this service.
         If reinvestigation does not resolve the dispute to your satisfaction, you may send a
statement to the consumer credit reporting agency, to be kept in your file, explaining why
you think the record is inaccurate. The consumer credit reporting agency must include your
statement about the disputed information in a report it issues about you".
         SECTION 12. Section 63 of said chapter 93, as so appearing, is hereby amended
by striking out, in line 1, the word "or", and inserting in place thereof the following
words:- , person who furnishes information to any consumer reporting agency, or.
         SECTION 13. Section 64 of said chapter 93, as so appearing, is hereby amended
by striking out, in line 1, the word "or" and inserting in place thereof the following
words:- , person who furnishes information to any consumer reporting agency, or.
         SECTION 14. This act shall take effect on January thirty-first, nineteen hundred and
ninety-six.
                                                                Approved September 7, 1995.


Chapter 126. AN ACT REQUIRING CERTAIN INFORMATION FROM PROP-
             ERTY OWNERS

       Be it enacted, etc., as follows:

         Chapter 59 of the General Laws is hereby amended by inserting after section 57C,
as appearing in the 1994 Official Edition, the following section-
         Section 57D. A notice of preliminary tax for real estate and personal property shall
include an affidavit of address, to be signed and sworn to by the owner of record of said
property. The affidavit shall include the following information: name of the owner, street
number, street name, city or town, state, zip code and telephone number of said owner.
         In the event that the residence of the owner of record is located outside of the
commonwealth, he shall appoint an agent located within the commonwealth and the enclosed
affidavit shall be completed by stating the agent's full name, street number, street address,

778
