4                                          limitation of actions                2014, c. 35

                            (ii)      interest on fines, taxes or penalties;
               (b)     commenced by Her Majesty or an agent of Her Majesty in
        respect of a claim relating to the administration of a social, health or eco-
        nomic program; or
               (c)  commenced by Her Majesty or an agent of Her Majesty to
        recover money owing in respect of student loans, awards or grants. 2014,
        c. 35, s. 10; 2015, c. 22, s. 3.


Certain proceedings re trespass to the person, assault or battery
        11     Section 8 does not apply to a proceeding in respect of a claim in rela-
tion to trespass to the person, assault or battery if
                    (a)     the claim is based on misconduct of a sexual nature; or
                    (b)     at the time of the injury on which the claim is based
                           (i)     one of the defendants was living with the claimant in
                    an intimate relationship, or
                            (ii)   the claimant was dependent, whether financially, emo-
                    tionally or physically, on one of the defendants. 2014, c. 35, s. 11.

Disallowance or invocation of limitation period
       12      (1)    In this Section, “limitation period” means the limitation
period established by
                            (a)       clause 8(1)(a); or
                            (b)       any enactment other than this Act.

               (2)    This Section applies only to claims brought to recover dam-
ages in respect of personal injuries.

               (3)    Where a claim is brought without regard to the limitation
period applicable to the claim, and an order has not been made under subsection (4),
the court in which the claim is brought, upon application, may disallow a defence
based on the limitation period and allow the claim to proceed if it appears to the
court to be just having regard to the degree to which
                           (a)    the limitation period creates a hardship to the claimant
                    or any person whom the claimant represents; and
                           (b)     any decision of the court under this Section would cre-
                    ate a hardship to the defendant or any person whom the defendant
                    represents, or any other person.

              (4)     Where a limitation period has expired, a person who wishes to
invoke the limitation period, upon giving at least 30 days’ notice to any person who
may have a claim, may apply to the court for an order terminating the right of the
person to whom such notice was given from commencing the claim and the court
may issue such order or may authorize the commencement of the claim only if it is
commenced on or before a day determined by the court.

              (5)     In making a determination under subsection (3), the court
shall have regard to all the circumstances of the case and, in particular, to


SEPTEMBER 1, 2015
